Add control flow analysis blogpost. (#1374)
cryspen/hax: docs/blog/posts/control-flow-analysis.md

---
authors:
  - maxime
title: "Control flow analysis with hax"
date: 2025-03-25
---

# Control flow analysis

> A difficulty of formal verification is that specifying programs can be hard. Certain kinds of programs can end up having a specification that is as complex as the code itself. In this case it is usually better to focus on simpler properties rather than a full specification. For example, showing that before calling one function you always  call another function (imagine a validation function). This is what we call control flow analysis, and hax can be used to prove this kind of properties of Rust programs.

Reviewer: I think it is also worth mentioning that these properties come up in a bunch of projects, including protocols like MLS (cite openms), APIs like Sandwich (cite) and even web services that need to sanitize SQL queries.

    if msg == "" {
        Err(Error::InvalidMessage)
    } else {
        Ok(())
    }
}

#[hax_lib::attributes]
impl State {
    #[hax_lib::requires(fstar!("message_validated $msg"))]
    fn commit_message(&mut self, msg: String) {
        self.0.push(msg)
    }

    fn receive_message(&mut self, msg: String)-> Result<(), Error> {
        validate_message(&msg)?;
        self.commit_message(msg);
        Ok(())
    }
}
```
Here we define `message_validated` as an abstract predicate, and we add a post-condition on `validate_message` to specify that this predicate holds if and only if `validate_message` has been called on the message. Then we can add a precondition on `commit_message` so that it is now mandatory to have called `validate_message` before `commit_message`. You can try [this example](https://hax-playground.cryspen.com/#fstar/4dec0f8ea9/gist=8f4ff24a1e2ecd1a0e45716e2a1f6c5d) in the hax playground, extract to F* and type-check. F* type-checking succeeds which means we have proven that whenever `commit_message` is called, `validate_message` has been called before on the same message.
## Showing that all valid messages are committed

> The property we showed in the previous section is a safety property: we show that we cannot end in a bad state by committing a message that has not been validated. But this doesn't mean we actually commit any message. Let's modify our specification to show that we do commit messages:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The property we showed in the previous section is a safety property: we show that we cannot end in a bad state by committing a message that has not been validated. But this doesn't mean we actually commit any message. Let's extend our specification to ensure that we *do* commit messages:
```

```rust
#[hax_lib::fstar::before(r"
assume val message_validated: string -> Type0
assume val message_committed: string -> Type0
")]
#[hax_lib::opaque]
#[hax_lib::ensures(|_| fstar!("message_validated $msg"))]
fn validate_message(msg: &str) -> Result<(), Error> {
    if msg == "" {
        Err(Error::InvalidMessage)
    } else {
        Ok(())
    }
}

#[hax_lib::attributes]
impl State {
    #[hax_lib::requires(fstar!("message_validated $msg"))]
    #[hax_lib::opaque]
    #[hax_lib::ensures(|_| fstar!("message_committed $msg"))]
    fn commit_message(&mut self, msg: String) {
        self.0.push(msg)
    }

    #[hax_lib::ensures(|res| fstar!("message_committed $msg"))]
    fn receive_message(&mut self, msg: String)-> Result<(), Error> {
        validate_message(&msg)?;
        self.commit_message(msg);
        Ok(())
    }
}
```

> We added a new abstract predicate `message_committed` that holds if a message has been committed. With this specification, F* is not able to prove the post-condition for `receive_message`. Of course, the message is committed only when it is valid so we need to add this condition in our post-condition:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We added a new abstract predicate `message_committed` that holds if a message has been committed. With this specification, F* is *not* able to prove the post-condition for `receive_message`. Of course, the message is committed only when it is valid. We need to add this to our post-condition:
```

```rust
#[hax_lib::ensures(|res| hax_lib::implies(validate_message(&msg).is_ok(), fstar!("message_committed $msg")))]
fn receive_message(&mut self, msg: String)-> Result<(), Error> {
    validate_message(&msg)?;
    self.commit_message(msg);
    Ok(())
}
```
You can [try this in the hax playground](https://hax-playground.cryspen.com/#fstar/4dec0f8ea9/gist=bdf9aa71a0c94a0318bc1682dd03d2a4) and see that F* is able to prove this post-condition!
## Verifying sandwich

> In [collaboration](https://cryspen.com/post/hax-sandbox/) with SandboxAQ, we worked on verifying the [sandwich](https://github.com/sandbox-quantum/sandwich) library. Sandwich is a Rust high-level cryptographic library that wraps around lower-level libraries like OpenSSL. OpenSSL is a C library and sandwich interfaces with it using Rust/C bindings which means it was impossible for us to push verification to the lowest level because of raw pointers that are not supported by hax. Instead, we focused on more abstract properties about the OpenSSL API functions that need to be called (in the right order, with the right parameters) to make sure encryption is correctly set. We used the methodology presented above to prove these properties, see [this blogpost for more information](todo-link).

Reviewer: I woulk cut "which means it was impossible .. not supported by hax". Instead, I would write, and we analyze the code starting from the public Sandwich API all the way down to just above the OpenSSL Rust bindings.
